<a name="sec6"></a>

## 6 Authenticator Lifecycle Management

*This section is normative.*

A number of events can occur over the lifecycle of a subscriber's authenticator that affect that authenticator's use. These events include binding, loss, theft, unauthorized duplication, expiration, and revocation. This section describes the actions to be taken in response to those events.

### <a name="binding"></a>6.1 Authenticator Binding

*Authenticator binding* refers to the establishment of an association between a specific authenticator and a subscriber's account, enabling the authenticator to be used — possibly in conjunction with other authenticators — to authenticate for that account.

Authenticators SHALL be bound to subscriber accounts by either:

- Issuance by the CSP as part of enrollment; or
- Associating a subscriber-provided authenticator that is acceptable to the CSP.

These guidelines refer to the *binding* rather than the issuance of an authenticator as to accommodate both options.

Throughout the digital identity lifecycle, CSPs SHALL maintain a record of all authenticators that are or have been associated with each identity. The CSP or verifier SHALL maintain the information required for throttling authentication attempts when required, as described in [Section 5.2.2](#throttle). The CSP SHALL also verify the type of user-provided authenticator (e.g., single-factor cryptographic device vs. multi-factor cryptographic device) so verifiers can determine compliance with requirements at each AAL.

The record created by the CSP SHALL contain the date and time the authenticator was bound to the account. The record SHOULD include information about the source of the binding (e.g., IP address, device identifier) of any device associated with the enrollment. If available, the record SHOULD also contain information about the source of unsuccessful authentications attempted with the authenticator.

When any new authenticator is bound to a subscriber account, the CSP SHALL ensure that the binding protocol and the protocol for provisioning the associated key(s) are done at a level of security commensurate with the AAL at which the authenticator will be used. For example, protocols for key provisioning SHALL use authenticated protected channels or be performed in person to protect against man-in-the-middle attacks. Binding of multifactor authenticators SHALL require multifactor authentication or equivalent (e.g., association with the session in which identity proofing has been just completed) be used in order to bind the authenticator. The same conditions apply when a key pair is generated by the authenticator and the public key is sent to the CSP.

#### 6.1.1 Binding at Enrollment

The following requirements apply when an authenticator is bound to an identity as a result of a successful identity proofing transaction, as described in [SP 800-63A](sp800-63a.html). Since Executive Order 13681 [[EO 13681]](#EO13681) requires the use of multi-factor authentication for the release of any personal data, it is important that authenticators be bound to subscriber accounts at enrollment, enabling access to personal data, including that established by identity proofing.

The CSP SHALL bind at least one, and SHOULD bind at least two, physical (*something you have*) authenticators to the subscriber's online identity, in addition to a memorized secret or one or more biometrics. Binding of multiple authenticators is preferred in order to recover from the loss or theft of the subscriber's primary authenticator.

While all identifying information is self-asserted at IAL1, preservation of online material or an online reputation makes it undesirable to lose control of an account due to the loss of an authenticator. The second authenticator makes it possible to securely recover from an authenticator loss. For this reason, a CSP SHOULD bind at least two physical authenticators to the subscriber's credential at IAL1 as well.

At IAL2 and above, identifying information is associated with the digital identity and the subscriber has undergone an identity proofing process as described in [SP 800-63A](sp800-63a.html). As a result, authenticators at the same AAL as the desired IAL SHALL be bound to the account. For example, if the subscriber has successfully completed proofing at IAL2, then AAL2 or AAL3 authenticators are appropriate to bind to the IAL2 identity. While a CSP MAY bind an AAL1 authenticator to an IAL2 identity, if the subscriber is authenticated at AAL1, the CSP SHALL NOT expose personal information, even if self-asserted, to the subscriber. As stated in the previous paragraph, the availability of additional authenticators provides backup methods for authentication if an authenticator is damaged, lost, or stolen.

If enrollment and binding cannot be completed in a single physical encounter or electronic transaction (i.e., within a single protected session), the following methods SHALL be used to ensure that the same party acts as the applicant throughout the processes:

For remote transactions:

1. The applicant SHALL identify themselves in each new binding transaction by presenting a temporary secret which was either established during a prior transaction, or sent to the applicant's phone number, email address, or postal address of record.

2. Long-term authenticator secrets SHALL only be issued to the applicant within a protected session.

For in-person transactions:

1. The applicant SHALL identify themselves in person by either using a secret as described in remote transaction (1) above, or through use of a biometric that was recorded during a prior encounter.

2. Temporary secrets SHALL NOT be reused.

3. If the CSP issues long-term authenticator secrets during a physical transaction, then they SHALL be loaded locally onto a physical device that is issued in person to the applicant or delivered in a manner that confirms the address of record.


#### <a name="post-enroll-bind"></a> 6.1.2 Post-Enrollment Binding

#### <a name="bindexisting"></a>6.1.2.1 Binding of an Additional Authenticator at Existing AAL

With the exception of memorized secrets, CSPs and verifiers SHOULD encourage subscribers to maintain at least two valid authenticators of each factor that they will be using. For example, a subscriber who usually uses an OTP device as a physical authenticator MAY also be issued a number of look-up secret authenticators, or register a device for out-of-band authentication, in case the physical authenticator is lost, stolen, or damaged. See [Section 6.1.2.3](#replacement) for more information on replacement of memorized secret authenticators.

Accordingly, CSPs SHOULD permit the binding of additional authenticators to a subscriber's account. Before adding the new authenticator, the CSP SHALL first require the subscriber to authenticate at the AAL (or a higher AAL) at which the new authenticator will be used. When an authenticator is added, the CSP SHOULD send a notification to the subscriber via a mechanism that is independent of the transaction binding the new authenticator (e.g., email to an address previously associated with the subscriber). The CSP MAY limit the number of authenticators that may be bound in this manner.

#### 6.1.2.2 Adding an Additional Factor to a Single-Factor Account

If the subscriber's account has only one authentication factor bound to it (i.e., at IAL1/AAL1) and an additional authenticator of a different authentication factor is to be added, the subscriber MAY request that the account be upgraded to AAL2. The IAL would remain at IAL1.

Before binding the new authenticator, the CSP SHALL require the subscriber to authenticate at AAL1. The CSP SHOULD send a notification of the event to the subscriber via a mechanism independent of the transaction binding the new authenticator (e.g., email to an address previously associated with the subscriber).

#### 6.1.2.3 <a name="replacement"></a> Replacement of a Lost Authentication Factor

If a subscriber loses all authenticators of a factor necessary to complete multi-factor authentication and has been identity proofed at IAL2 or IAL3, that subscriber SHALL repeat the identity proofing process described in [SP 800-63A](sp800-63a.html). An abbreviated proofing process, confirming the binding of the claimant to previously-supplied evidence, MAY be used if the CSP has retained the evidence from the original proofing process pursuant to a privacy risk assessment as described in [SP 800-63A](sp800-63a.html) Section 4.2. The CSP SHALL require the claimant to authenticate using an authenticator of the remaining factor, if any, to confirm binding to the existing identity. Reestablishment of authentication factors at IAL3 SHALL be done in person, or through a supervised remote process as described in [SP 800-63A](sp800-63a.html) Section 5.3.3.2, and SHALL verify the biometric collected during the original proofing process.

The CSP SHOULD send a notification of the event to the subscriber. This MAY be the same notice as is required as part of the proofing process.

Replacement of a lost (i.e., forgotten) memorized secret is problematic because it is very common. Additional "backup" memorized secrets do not mitigate this because they are just as likely to also have been forgotten. If a biometric is bound to the account, the biometric and associated physical authenticator SHOULD be used to establish a new memorized secret.

As an alternative to the above re-proofing process when there is no biometric bound to the account, the CSP MAY bind a new memorized secret with authentication using two physical authenticators, along with a confirmation code that has been sent to one of the subscriber's addresses of record. The confirmation code SHALL consist of at least 6 random alphanumeric characters generated by an approved random bit generator [[SP 800-90Ar1]](#SP800-90Ar1). Those sent to a postal address of record SHALL be valid for a maximum of 7 days but MAY be made valid up to 21 days via an exception process to accommodate addresses outside the direct reach of the U.S. Postal Service. Confirmation codes sent by means other than physical mail SHALL be valid for a maximum of 10 minutes.

#### 6.1.3 Binding to a Subscriber-provided Authenticator

A subscriber may already possess authenticators suitable for authentication at a particular AAL. For example, they may have a two-factor authenticator from a social network provider, considered AAL2 and IAL1, and would like to use those credentials at an RP that requires IAL2.

CSPs SHOULD, where practical, accommodate the use of subscriber-provided authenticators in order to relieve the burden to the subscriber of managing a large number of authenticators. Binding of these authenticators SHALL be done as described in [Section 6.1.2.1](#post-enroll-bind). In situations where the authenticator strength is not self-evident (e.g., between single-factor and multi-factor authenticators of a given type), the CSP SHOULD assume the use of the weaker authenticator unless it is able to establish that the stronger authenticator is in fact being used (e.g., by verification with the issuer or manufacturer of the authenticator).

#### 6.1.4 Renewal

The CSP SHOULD bind an updated authenticator an appropriate amount of time before an existing authenticator's expiration. The process for this SHOULD conform closely to the initial authenticator binding process (e.g., confirming address of record). Following successful use of the new authenticator, the CSP MAY revoke the authenticator that it is replacing.

### 6.2 Loss, Theft, Damage, and Unauthorized Duplication

Compromised authenticators include those that have been lost, stolen, or subject to unauthorized duplication. Generally, one must assume that a lost authenticator has been stolen or compromised by someone that is not the legitimate subscriber of the authenticator. Damaged or malfunctioning authenticators are also considered compromised to guard against any possibility of extraction of the authenticator secret. One notable exception is a memorized secret that has been forgotten without other indications of having been compromised, such as having been obtained by an attacker.

Suspension, revocation, or destruction of compromised authenticators SHOULD occur as promptly as practical following detection. Agencies SHOULD establish time limits for this process.

To facilitate secure reporting of the loss, theft, or damage to an authenticator, the CSP SHOULD provide the subscriber with a method of authenticating to the CSP using a backup or alternate authenticator. This backup authenticator SHALL be either a memorized secret or a physical authenticator. Either MAY be used, but only one authentication factor is required to make this report. Alternatively, the subscriber MAY establish an authenticated protected channel to the CSP and verify information collected during the proofing process. The CSP MAY choose to verify an address of record (i.e., email, telephone, postal) and suspend authenticator(s) reported to have been compromised. The suspension SHALL be reversible if the subscriber successfully authenticates to the CSP using a valid (i.e., not suspended) authenticator and requests reactivation of an authenticator suspended in this manner. The CSP MAY set a time limit after which a suspended authenticator can no longer be reactivated.

### 6.3 Expiration

CSPs MAY issue authenticators that expire. If and when an authenticator expires, it SHALL NOT be usable for authentication. When an authentication is attempted using an expired authenticator, the CSP SHOULD give an indication to the subscriber that the authentication failure is due to expiration rather than some other cause.

The CSP SHALL require subscribers to surrender or prove destruction of any physical authenticator containing attribute certificates signed by the CSP as soon as practical after expiration or receipt of a renewed authenticator.

### 6.4 Revocation and Termination

Revocation of an authenticator — sometimes referred to as termination, especially in the context of PIV authenticators — refers to removal of the binding between an authenticator and a credential the CSP maintains.

CSPs SHALL revoke the binding of authenticators promptly when an online identity ceases to exist (e.g., subscriber's death, discovery of a fraudulent subscriber), when requested by the subscriber, or when the CSP determines that the subscriber no longer meets its eligibility requirements.

The CSP SHALL require subscribers to surrender or certify destruction of any physical authenticator containing certified attributes signed by the CSP as soon as practical after revocation or termination takes place. This is necessary to block the use of the authenticator's certified attributes in offline situations between revocation/termination and expiration of the certification.

Further requirements on the termination of PIV authenticators are found in [FIPS 201](#FIPS201).
