<a name="sec9"></a>

## 9. Privacy Considerations

These privacy considerations provide supplemental guidance for the requirements in section 4.

### 9.1. Privacy Risk Assessment	Subsections 4.1.6, 4.2.6 and 4.3.6 require the CSP to conduct a privacy risk assessment for records retention. In conducting a privacy risk assessment, CSPs should consider 1) the likelihood that the records retention could create a problem for the subscriber such as invasiveness or unauthorized access to the information; and 2) the impact if a problem did occur. CSPs should be able to reasonably justify any response they take to identified privacy risks, including accepting the risk, mitigating the risk; and sharing the risk. The use of subscriber consent should be considered a form of sharing the risk, and therefore should only be used when a subscriber could reasonably be expected to have the capacity to assess and accept the shared risk.### 9.2. Privacy ControlsSection 4.4 encourages CSPs to employ appropriately tailored privacy controls. NIST [[SP 800-53]](#sp800-53) provides a set of privacy controls that CSPs should consider implementing when deploying authentication mechanisms. These controls cover notices, redress and other important considerations for successful and trustworthy deployments. ### 9.3. Use LimitationSection 4.4 does not permit the CSP to use information about authenticators collected and maintained in the authentication process for any purpose other than authentication or to comply with law or legal process unless the CSP provides clear notice and obtains consent from the subscriber for additional uses. Care should be taken to ensure that use of such information is limited to its original purpose for collection. If use of such information does not fall within uses related to authentication or to comply with law or legal process, the CSP must provide notice and obtain consent from the subscriber. Consult your Senior Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP) if there are questions about whether proposed agency uses fall within the scope of these uses. This notice should follow the same principles as described in effective notice (see Chapter A, section 8.2) and should not be rolled up into a legalistic privacy policy or general terms and conditions. Rather if there are uses outside the bounds of these explicit purposes, the subscriber should be provided with a meaningful way to understand the purpose for additional uses, and the opportunity to accept or decline. The CSP cannot make acceptance by the subscriber of additional uses a condition of providing authentication services. ### 9.4. Agency Specific Privacy Compliance Section 4.4 covers specific compliance obligations for federal CSPs. It is critical to involve your agency’s SAOP in the earliest stages of digital authentication system development to assess and mitigate privacy risks and as advise the agency on compliance requirements such as whether or not the collection of PII to issue or maintain authenticators triggers the Privacy Act of 1974 or the E-Government Act of 2002 requirement to conduct a Privacy Impact Assessment. For example, with respect to centralized maintenance of biometrics, it is likely that the Privacy Act requirements will be triggered and require coverage by either a new or existing Privacy Act system of records due to the collection and maintenance of attributes/PII necessary for authentication. The SAOP can similarly assist the agency in determining whether a PIA is required. 

These considerations should not be read as a requirement to develop a Privacy Act System of Records Notice or PIA for authentication alone; in many cases it will make the most sense to draft a PIA and SORN that encompasses the entire digital authentication process or include the digital authentication process as part of a larger programmatic PIA that discusses the program or benefit the agency is establishing online access to. 

Due to the many components of digital authentication, it is important for the SAOP to have an awareness and understanding of each individual component so as to advise appropriately on what compliance requirements apply. Moreover, a thorough understanding of the individual components of digital authentication will enable the SAOP to thoroughly assess and mitigate privacy risks either through compliance processes or by other means.

