<a name="sec5"></a>

<div class="breaker"></div>

## 6. Digital Identity Risk Management



OMB guidance outlines a five-step process by which agencies should meet
their authentication assurance requirements:

1.  *Conduct a risk assessment of the government system* - No specific
    risk assessment methodology is prescribed for this purpose;
    however, NIST [[SP 800-30]](#SP800-30) offers a general
    process for risk assessment and risk mitigation, and NIST [[SP 800-37]](#SP800-37) Revision 1 provides recommendations on the selection and specification of security controls for a system as part of an organization-wide information security program. This guideline supports the identification of risk to the organization or to individuals associated with the operation of a system.

2.  *Map identified risks to the appropriate assurance level* - Section
    2.2 of OMB M-04-04 provides the guidance necessary for agencies to
    perform this mapping.

3.  *Select technology based on digital authentication technical guidance* -
    After the appropriate assurance level has been determined, OMB
    guidance states that agencies should select technologies that meet
    the corresponding technical requirements, as specified by
    this document suite. Some agencies may possess existing
    digital authentication technology. Agencies should verify that any
    existing technology meets the requirements specified in
    this document suite.

4.  *Validate that the implemented system has met the required assurance
    level* - As some implementations may create or compound particular
    risks, agencies should conduct a final validation to confirm that
    the system achieves the required assurance level for the
    user-to-agency process. NIST [[SP 800-53A]](#SP800-53A)
    provides requirements for the assessment of the implemented system
    during the validation process. Validation should be performed as
    part of a security authorization process as described in NIST [[SP 800-37]](#SP800-37), Revision 1.

5.  *Periodically reassess the system to determine
    technology refresh requirements* - The agency shall periodically
    reassess the system to ensure that the identity
    authentication requirements continue to be satisfied. NIST [[SP 800-37]](#SP800-37), Revision 1 provides recommendations on
    the frequency, depth and breadth of periodic reassessments. As with
    the initial validation process, agencies should follow the
    assessment requirements specified in [[SP 800-53A]](#SP800-53A) for conducting the security assessment.



### 6.1. Summary

This guidance requires agencies to review new and existing electronic transactions to ensure that authentication processes provide the appropriate level of assurance. It establishes and describes four levels of identity assurance for electronic transactions requiring authentication. Assurance levels also provide a basis for assessing Credential Service Providers (CSPs) on behalf of Federal agencies. This document will assist agencies in determining their e-government authentication needs. Agency business-process owners bear the primary responsibility to identify assurance levels and strategies for providing them. This responsibility extends to electronic authentication systems.Agencies should determine assurance levels using the following steps, described in Section 2.3:1. Conduct a risk assessment of the e-government system.2. Map identified risks to the applicable assurance level.3. Select technology based on e-authentication technical guidance.4. Validate that the implemented system has achieved the required assurance level.5. Periodically reassess the system to determine technology refresh requirements.

### 6.2. Scope

This guidance applies to remote authentication of human users of Federal agency IT systems for the purposes of conducting government business electronically (or e-government). Though that authentication typically involves a computer or other electronic device, this guidance does not apply to the authentication of servers, or other machines and network components.• This guidance is intended to help agencies identify and analyze the risks associated with each step of the authentication process. The process includes (but is not limited to) identity proofing, credentialing, technical and administrative management, record keeping, auditing, and use of the credential. Each step of the process influences the technology’s overall conformance to the desired assurance level.• This guidance supplements OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, Appendix II, Implementation of the Government Paperwork Elimination Act (GPEA).• This guidance does not directly apply to authorization. Authorization focuses on the actions permitted of an identity after authentication has taken place. Decisions concerning authorization are and should remain the purview of the business process owner.• This guidance does not address issues associated with “intent to sign,” or agency use of authentication credentials as electronic signatures. For more information on electronic signatures, see the OMB guidance on implementing GPEA1 and the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, Pub. L. No. 106-2292.• This guidance does not identify which technologies should be implemented. The Department of Commerce’s National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) is developing complementary e-authentication technical guidance that agencies will use to identify appropriate technologies, based on the analysis process described here.• This document does not confer, and may not be used to support, any right on behalf of any person or entity against the United States or its agencies or officials.

### 6.3. Overview

This document provides agencies with guidance on electronic authentication (e-authentication). The National Research Council report, “Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy”3 defines e-authentication as the process of establishing confidence in user identities electronically presented to an information system. It defines individual authentication as the process of establishing an understood level of confidence that an identifier refers to a specific individual.Authentication focuses on confirming a person’s identity, based on the reliability of his or her credential. Authorization focuses on identifying the person’s user permissions.To successfully implement a government service electronically (or e-government), Federal agencies must determine the required level of assurance in the authentication for each transaction. This is accomplished through a risk assessment for each transaction. The assessment identifies:a) risks, andb) their likelihood of occurrence.OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, states that agencies must prepare and update a strategy that identifies and mitigates risks associated with each information system. This guidance will help agencies map identified risks to corresponding assurance levels.



### 6.5. Risk and Impacts

While, this guidance addresses only those risks associated with authentication errors, NIST Special Publication 800-30, “Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems,” recommends a general methodology for managing risk in Federal information systems. In addition, other means of risk management, (e.g., network access restrictions, intrusion detection, and event monitoring) may help reduce the need for higher levels of authentication assurance.Potential Impact Categories: To determine the appropriate level of assurance in the user’s asserted identity, agencies must assess the potential risks, and identify measures to minimize their impact. Authentication errors with potentially worse consequences require higher levels of assurance. Business process, policy, and technology may help reduce risk. The risk from an authentication error is a function of two factors:a) potential harm or impact, andb) the likelihood of such harm or impact.Categories of harm and impact include:• Inconvenience, distress, or damage to standing or reputation• Financial loss or agency liability• Harm to agency programs or public interests• Unauthorized release of sensitive information• Personal safety• Civil or criminal violations.Required assurance levels for electronic transactions are determined by assessing the potential impact of each of the above categories using the potential impact values described in Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 199, “Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems.” The three potential impact values are:6• Low impact• Moderate impact• High impact.

The next section defines the potential impacts for each category. Note: If authentication errors cause no measurable consequences for a category, there is “no” impact.Determining Potential Impact of Authentication Errors:Potential impact of inconvenience, distress, or damage to standing or reputation:• Low—at worst, limited, short-term inconvenience, distress or embarrassment to any party.• Moderate—at worst, serious short term or limited long-term inconvenience, distress or damage to the standing or reputation of any party.• High—severe or serious long-term inconvenience, distress or damage to the standing or reputation of any party (ordinarily reserved for situations with particularly severe effects or which affect many individuals).Potential impact of financial loss:• Low—at worst, an insignificant or inconsequential unrecoverable financial loss to any party, or at worst, an insignificant or inconsequential agency liability.• Moderate—at worst, a serious unrecoverable financial loss to any party, or a serious agency liability.• High—severe or catastrophic unrecoverable financial loss to any party; or severe or catastrophic agency liability.Potential impact of harm to agency programs or public interests:• Low—at worst, a limited adverse effect on organizational operations or assets, or public interests. Examples of limited adverse effects are: (i) mission capability degradation to the extent and duration that the organization is able to perform its primary functions with noticeably reduced effectiveness, or (ii) minor damage to organizational assets or public interests.• Moderate—at worst, a serious adverse effect on organizational operations or assets, or public interests. Examples of serious adverse effects are: (i) significant mission capability degradation to the extent and duration that the organization is able to perform its primary functions with significantly reduced effectiveness; or (ii) significant damage to organizational assets or public interests.• High—a severe or catastrophic adverse effect on organizational operations or assets, or public interests. Examples of severe or catastrophic effects are: (i) severe mission capability degradation or loss of to the extent and duration that the organization is unable to perform one or more of its primary functions; or (ii) major damage to organizational assets or public interests.Potential impact of unauthorized release of sensitive information:• Low—at worst, a limited release of personal, U.S. government sensitive, or commercially sensitive information to unauthorized parties resulting in a loss of confidentiality with a low impact as defined in FIPS PUB 199.• Moderate—at worst, a release of personal, U.S. government sensitive, or commercially sensitive information to unauthorized parties resulting in loss of confidentiality with a moderate impact as defined in FIPS PUB 199.
High—a release of personal, U.S. government sensitive, or commercially sensitive information to unauthorized parties resulting in loss of confidentiality with a high impact as defined in FIPS PUB 199.Potential impact to personal safety:• Low—at worst, minor injury not requiring medical treatment.• Moderate—at worst, moderate risk of minor injury or limited risk of injury requiring medical treatment.• High—a risk of serious injury or death.The potential impact of civil or criminal violations is:• Low—at worst, a risk of civil or criminal violations of a nature that would not ordinarily be subject to enforcement efforts.• Moderate—at worst, a risk of civil or criminal violations that may be subject to enforcement efforts.• High—a risk of civil or criminal violations that are of special importance to enforcement programs.

Determining Assurance Level:Compare the impact profile from the risk assessment to the impact profiles associated with each assurance level, as shown in Table 1 below. To determine the required assurance level, find the lowest level whose impact profile meets or exceeds the potential impact for every category analyzed in the risk assessment (as noted in step 2 below).

**Insert new table 1 here - May need to switch to HTML to get cell spanning**

|Potential Impact Categories|1|2|3|
|:--------------------------|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|Inconvenience, distress or damage to standing or reputation|Low|Mod|High|
|Financial loss or agency liability|Low|Mod|High|
|Harm to agency programs or public interests|N/A|Low/Mod|High|
|Unauthorized release of sensitive information|N/A|Low/Mod|High|
|Personal Safety|N/A|Low|Mod/High|
|Civil or criminal violations|N/A|Low/Mod|High|

In analyzing potential risks, the agency must consider all of the potential direct and indirect results of an authentication failure, including the possibility that there will be more than one failure, or harms to more than one person. The definitions of potential impacts contain some relative terms, like "serious" or "minor," whose meaning will depend on context. The agency should consider the context and the nature of the persons or entities affected to decide the relative significance of these harms. Over time, the meaning of these terms will become more definite as agencies gain practical experience with these issues. The analysis of harmsto agency programs or other public interests depends strongly on the context; the agency should consider these issues with care.In some cases (as shown in Table 1), impact may correspond to multiple assurance levels. For example, Table 1 shows that a moderate risk of financial loss corresponds to assurance levels 2 and 3. In such cases, agencies should use the context to determine the appropriate assurance level.

2.3. Determining Assurance Levels and selecting authentication solutions using Risk AssessmentAgencies shall use the following steps to determine the appropriate assurance level:Step 1: Conduct a risk assessment of the e-government system. Guidance for agencies in conducting risk assessments is available in A-130, Section 5 of OMB’s GPEA guidance and existing NIST guidance. The risk assessment will measure the relative severity of the potential harm and likelihood of occurrence of a wide range of impacts (to any party) associated with the e-government system in the event of an identity authentication error.Note: An E-government system may have multiple categories or types of transactions, which may require separate analysis within the overall risk assessment. An E-government system may also span multiple agencies whose activities may require separate consideration.Risk analysis is to some extent a subjective process, in which agencies must consider harms that might result from, among other causes, technical failures, malevolent third parties, public misunderstandings, and human error. Agencies should consider a wide range of possible scenarios in seeking to determine what potential harms are associated with their business process. It is better to be over-inclusive than under-inclusive in conducting this analysis. Once risks have been identified, there may also be ways to adjust the business process to mitigate particular risks by reducing the likelihood that they will occur (see Step 4).Step 2: Map identified risks to the required assurance level. The risk assessment should be summarized in terms of the potential impact categories in Section 2.2.To determine the required assurance level, agencies should initially identify risks inherent in the transaction process, regardless of its authentication technology. Agencies should then tie the potential impact category outcomes to the authentication level, choosing the lowest level of authentication that will cover all of potential impacts identified. Thus, if five categories of potential impact are appropriate for Level 1, and one category of potential impact is appropriate for Level 2, the transaction would require a Level 2 authentication. For example, if the misuse of a user’s electronic identity/credentials during a medical procedure presents a risk of serious injury or death, map to the risk profile identified under Level 4, even if other consequences are minimal.Step 3: Select technology based on the NIST e-authentication technical guidance. After determining the assurance level, the agency should refer to the NIST e-authentication

technical guidance to identify and implement the appropriate technical requirements.Step 4: After implementation, validate that the information system has operationally achieved the required assurance level. Because some implementations may create or compound particular risks, conduct a final validation to confirm that the system achieves the required assurance level for the user-to-agency process. The agency should validate that the authentication process satisfies the systems’s authentication requirements as part of required security procedures (e.g., certification and accreditation).Step 5: Periodically reassess the information system to determine technology refresh requirements. The agency must periodically reassess the information system to ensure that the identity authentication requirements continue to be valid as a result of technology changes or changes to the agency’s business processes. Annual information security assessment requirements provide an excellent opportunity for this. Agencies may adjust the identity credential’s level of assurance using additional risk mitigation measures. Easing identity credential assurance level requirements may increase the size of the enabled customer pool, but agencies must ensure that this does not corrupt the system’s choice of the appropriate assurance level.

**Need new level definitions:**  • Level 1: Little or no confidence in the asserted identity’s validity.• Level 2: Some confidence in the asserted identity’s validity.• Level 3: High confidence in the asserted identity’s validity.• Level 4: Very high confidence in the asserted identity’s validity.


